The big turning point in my life was
being sexually abused, groomed, all that
kind of stuff. I mean, that that was no
doubt where I felt like my whole
physiology, psychology, sense of self
changed.
>> [music]
>> Writer and actor Richard Gadd's Netflix
series [music] Baby Reindeer
unexpectedly became not just a critical
hit, but one of the streamer's most
popular shows ever. Unexpectedly,
[music]
because Gadd was a relative unknown when
he made Baby Reindeer, and it's a
strikingly original as it is unsettling.
>> I will repeatedly go back to this man's
house and let him abuse me
for a little beep
of fame.
>> The show is based on Gadd's own
experiences as a victim of sexual
assault and [music] stalking.
>> I knew she was mad, and I knew she was
dangerous, but she flattered me.
And that was enough. And it catapulted
the star into the spotlight, bringing an
intense amount [music] of attention to
his personal and professional life. But
rather than shy away, Gadd's response
has been to go deeper. His new show,
[music] Half Man, which will air on HBO,
follows a decades-long mutually
destructive friendship between two
Scottish men, one played [music] by
Gadd.
You messed up my life.
Unlike Baby Reindeer, the new show is
not based on his own life, but it
tackles many of the same themes: sexual
[music] confusion, masculinity, and the
long shadow of trauma, all of which Gadd
is still trying to understand in both
his art and in his life.
Here's my conversation with Richard
Gadd.
Richard, thank you for taking the time
to speak with me today.
Thanks very much for for having me. I'm
I'm excited to be here. I need you to
explain why you're sitting in a in a
nicely appointed comfortable-looking
room with a fireplace, and and I'm
sitting in my
sparse and slightly depressing-looking
home office.
>> [laughter]
>> And that's because on the day on the
morning we're speaking, there was a
giant blizzard on the East Coast, which
has prevented me from getting into the
office. So, we're trying to do like the
DIY punk rock version of of the
interview, and that's why it looks a
little funny, and maybe we'll sound a
little funny, but
that's what's going on if you're
wondering. Oh, oh, all good. I've been
trying hard not to imagine what the rest
of the room looks like, but I won't make
you turn the camera and show me.
>> [laughter]
>> But I want to start with a question that
maybe doesn't have any simple or
straightforward answer. Mhm. You know,
you're you were someone who
you know, for years
were working as a as a performer, you
know, you did stand-up comedy, but the
work itself was often intentionally
alienating. You know, you did a lot of
anti-comedy. It's not like you were
trying to make, you know, you've been
trying for years to make some mainstream
thing, and then finally Baby Reindeer
was the thing. You you were kind of
doing your your own
weird thing. And so, as a result of
that, I imagine that the possibility of
enormous mainstream success was probably
not even really on your radar as as
something that
was going to happen in your career. But
what did achieving success
show you about the reality of what
success can do for you or can't do for
you emotionally?
>> [snorts]
>> The best thing about success is that it
leads to opportunity for me, cuz all I
really ever care about is writing the
next thing or working on the next thing
or trying to
you know, explore more things that I
want to do. It's not as fame, on the
other hand, is is an interesting thing
that I think I still come to terms with.
You know, I think at the best times I'm
a self-conscious person.
And and I think like
it's so funny I always look back on
those, as you say, those kind of early
comedy days where I was performing this
alienating sort of comedy style to to to
comedy clubs up and down the country. I
I used to think, why is no one getting
this? This is
>> [laughter]
>> This is This is at the This is the cusp
of brilliance this right here. And it's
so I find it so good that I can look
back in that and kind of laugh at myself
because
I think fame
has led to a certain degree of
discomfort in in the way I go about my
life now. You always have to think about
like what you're doing and where you're
going and
uh
like not so much about just in like, oh,
I hope there's not too many people here.
I I I worry about people coming up to me
and and and not that it's ever bad when
people come up to me. They're all almost
like projections of my own fear, but
that is also a byproduct of fame, you
know, because people who come up to me,
if not all the time, tend to be really
really nice.
But I still, because I think I'm just
wired to think
uh
think in an anxious way, I always think
there's something something is lurking
that might be
hard to deal with in in a social
situation. But but I I think in a lot of
ways like
I'm quite a reclusive guy in a lot of
ways, which I don't think people kind of
realize. And I it didn't really change
like
the way I live my life. All I was ever
interested in doing was was taking Baby
Reindeer and building on the success
with
hopefully different pieces of of work
and art.
The new show, Half Man,
raises so many questions about
masculinity, right? It's one of the
central themes of the show is what does
it mean to be a man? What does manhood
look like? Yeah. And that was also a
question that comes up in Baby Reindeer
in various ways. Do you have a have an
answer to the question, what does it
mean to be a man? For for yourself? Ah,
well, that's a pretty
it's a tough one to answer. I mean, it's
tricky. It's tricky. I definitely I
remember like a press release going out
with Half Man saying it will get to the
bottom of the question
what it means to be a man. And I
remember, [laughter] you know, I was in
a really busy writing process at that
point of view. And then a press release
comes to your desk, you're like, I don't
have time for this. Yeah, that's fine.
And so, I think I worry that quite a lot
of people are heading into Half Man with
with with me somehow answering an almost
existentially impossible question. But I
for myself, no,
because I think I suppose that's why I
do
write these themes and these things. And
and a lot of the characters,
particularly essential characters, go on
these kind of soul-searching journeys of
self-discovery because I think I've
always had a sort of like
a void within me that that I can't quite
explain or like a a certain sort of
a hole in the soul or whatever that I
that I think perhaps comes I'm not sure
about this, but perhaps comes from
pressures that I felt as a man in my
life. But in terms of answering
questions, I
I think it offers questions. I I don't
think it answers them. What were some of
the struggles or or open-ended questions
around manhood that you felt like you've
had to come to terms with? Yeah,
absolutely. I I certainly think like a
lot of
the way
sort of a certain sense of broken
masculinity operates in in in today's
sort of society can be traced back to
certain societal repressions which
happened years ago.
Um you know, the '80s in this country
was a very unforgiving time
for for people who grew up different to
to to to everyone else. And and I think
that leads to repression, which can lead
in general to to sort of broken and
damaging behavior in in later life. And
and that was what I wanted to explore. I
wanted to sort of show these sort of
deeply entrenched sort of things that
affect us in our childhood and how they
manifest in their adulthood. I know it's
this is kind of like quite heavy stuff
to get into, but there's certainly
things that happened in my life that
I've spoken about publicly that I found
very hard to come to terms with due to
draconian false ideas that that that
this doesn't happen to a man and this
shouldn't happen to a man. And
and that
men shouldn't be vulnerable in this way.
All stuff that I've I've rejected. And
in fact, being
I guess vulnerable or or kind of
admitting to to to my my my my
biggest secrets of whatever has led to
the biggest freedom in my life.
>> I I assume you're referring to the
assault that happened to you.
But the thing that you said was that ex-
or alluded to was that exploring the
ideas or making them talking about them
has been liberating. Um and that's
that's related to something I wanted to
ask about because in
you know, Half Man, you know, you do
talk about these ideas again of of
manhood, of of, you know, people caught
in in mutually
I don't know I don't know if destructive
is quite the right word, but sort of
mutually complicated relationships.
Uh
there are
themes of abuse
in Half Man. And and these are themes
that also came up in in Baby Reindeer.
And the thing that I want to know about
is how do you achieve that sort of
liberation through making art about
these traumatic
personal ideas? Like is Do Do you find
it cathartic? Is it Is it healing? Is
there some moment at which you're able
to go like
okay, I've sort of moved forward in my
processing of of this experience? It's
kind of interesting. I I I I think I
find I think
you know, I I I I I think because of
Baby Reindeer people people come up and
they tell me things, you know, and
and and and I say I can never give
advice, but try writing it down. And I
often feel like when we
keep something in our head or keep it
inside of us, it grows to it can grow to
intolerable levels, like intolerable
levels. And I think
um the shame and fear and guilt and all
the feelings around sort of
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> uh
complicity or complicated all the
complicated stuff and and the fact that
I
even
feeling like an idiot was a big part of
of sort of like
the battle that I faced with everything.
I I I
I I it built to intolerable levels where
I felt like all I was doing was whipping
like a
a billiard ball around my head over and
over and over and over again to the
point where it was just ricocheting
harder and harder each time. And
and it got to the point where like it
was intolerable. And I think I really
had a choice cuz I couldn't keep it in
any longer, really. And I And I think
what art did is the first thing I ever
did before I spoke to anyone about it
was I I sort of wrote it down. And I
think what art has always done and what
it's always given to me is is is a
playground to explore things that I'm
sort of struggling with. And that's kind
of all I really wanted to do. I I I also
wanted to sort of understand, you know,
masculinity is such a talked about word.
And it has such a sort of gravitational
pull in a way. It's a big weighty sort
of word. And I I I really wanted to
to sort of explore male camaraderie and
the male connection, which seems to be
almost transcendental in a way and
sometimes unexplained. And I really
wanted to dig deep into that. And I
think, you know, toxic masculinity,
which which I'm sure is a word that
people are probably going to synonymize
with the show in a lot of ways.
I think for something to be toxic, you
know, like drugs are toxic, but they
have to be intoxicating as well, you
know, to to begin with. And I think that
the normalization of these things that
were so casually thrown around in the
'80s on TV, in society, words, slurs,
all these kinds of things.
They they lead to a repression in people
who are scared to admit
certain things. But really I I I just
really wanted to to kind of get into the
whole messy, complicated
um subject.
>> Yeah. Is there anything about yourself
that you're still scared to admit?
>> [snorts]
>> Probably. Probably. You know, I think
almost like the journey of life is
trying to come to terms with yourself,
you know. And I I and I think almost
like
you can stumble through life not
knowing. I've always been quite confused
sexually, which is something I've always
kind of spoken about.
Even as I sit here, you know,
36-year-old, I still feel I still
sometimes feel confused. I still sort of
feel like and and I've tried to take
many labels in my life.
You know, and and the labels never
brought me any sort of comfort. Like you
know, comfort comes from within. It
always does. No no external
answer usually exists to an internal
conflict in in in my opinion. And so and
I certainly think with me the
inconsistencies, the confusing nature of
life, the fact I've never really felt
settled in any camp.
That's okay. And and accepting that I
might never stand on solid ground is a
form of acceptance that I didn't realize
I might have to come to terms with.
And that's kind of the way it is. I
think sometimes accepting that is is
half the battle. Um I think a lot of men
have had the experience, particularly in
adolescence, of being
either friends with or drawn to
uh other guys who
exhibit what we would call toxic
masculinity or just in general
antisocial behavior. Like I know I know
that there were periods in my life where
I was hanging around with guys who
were kind of kind of like not
well-adjusted
dudes who did kind of not well-adjusted
things. But there there is there is an
an attraction to that.
>> But I I I just wonder if you had any
particular relationships
that you were thinking of or drawing on
when you were creating the central
relationship of Half Man, which is
between Nile, who played by Jamie Bell,
who's sort of a more I guess you could
say more sensitive younger man,
[clears throat] and and Reuben, played
by you as an as an adult, uh who just is
is you know, the word that comes to mind
is is antisocial, just struggling with
so much more. Were there relationships
that you were thinking about or you
know, drawing on in some way? I think I
must have been on a sort of subconscious
level, you know. I I sort of I I think
they must have been drawn. I mean, there
were certainly people in my school who
who were terrifying. And there were
certainly people in my neighborhood who
were terrifying. There were certainly
people that I would pray weren't on a
bus when I was getting on the bus and
all these kinds of things. And I
certainly think I have encountered
people in my life who are prone to
phenomenal violence, for sure. And
almost like as a knee-jerk reaction to
to to any anything almost. And I I you
know, I I can't say that it was drawn on
anyone in particular at all. In fact, it
definitely wasn't. But I certainly think
I've encountered enough intimidating
male behavior to be able to to draw on
to draw on it,
and I think really, you know, Reuben
like
it's an interesting one cuz I'm keen to
see what people think of Reuben in a lot
of ways. And I have a feeling
I even hope that I have this weird
feeling that people might like him more
than you might expect because
>> [gasps]
>> I think like he runs on a river of pain.
And I think there are a lot of men and I
think the people who might like him are
a lot of men who act like him because I
think they might.
>> Right. Hyper-aggressive, macho.
>> Yeah. Fixated on male power. Yeah. And
they might see someone like Reuben and
they might realize what they've been
running from all this time. But uh
something somewhere has happened that
has made them be that defensive, that
insecure in a way. And I thought that
that was worth exploring. I I really
did. I I I I feel
you know, I I don't know whether this is
too empathetic, but but I I feel like a
lot of male violence comes from a
violence that they they have suffered
before. Half Man is very different from
Baby Reindeer in many ways, but as I
said at the outset, thematically it
shares a lot. Uh
but also there there's there are a
couple times in Half Man, this is not a
spoiler at all, a couple times in Half
Man where
the the character of Reuben mockingly
refers to the character of Nile as
as Bambi. Mhm. And I thought, is this
are you making some sort of It's a nod
to Baby Reindeer, right?
Actually, no. And it's funny because
Well, you know, people are going to read
it that way, right?
I guess so. I mean I mean, that was the
funny thing because the script
You could have
>> [laughter]
>> picked any
any animal in the world and you picked a
reindeer.
>> Yeah. Yeah, well well, I think I think I
think I think I think I think I think I
think
>> I guess maybe there's some maybe I have
a sort of subconscious love for them.
I'm not sure, but but I I sort of I
think like I you know, it's funny cuz
it's funny you say that cuz I did I did
wonder if people would think that. But
but if you look at the script that I
wrote that was written before Baby
Reindeer.
>> It had Bambi
>> had Bambi in it. And and it was only a
way to to sort of mock him to use a name
that innately sort of patronizes Nile
and mock him and and show that he's like
a deer and nice. Like he's he's and it
was only a way for Reuben to sort of
you know, like a lot of I guess alpha
presences do. They they find different
ways to undermine you so they assert
their dominance over you. And I thought
Bambi was a very It's almost like one of
those nicknames you can give someone
that you can't quite tell if you're
insulting them or not. It's quite
effective by Reuben, you know. And it's
but it is like it is demeaning in a lot
of ways, but it's hard to kind of
pinpoint that. And so even in later on
in the series when it's used again, it
is used provocatively. And I needed a
name like that for for the relationship
to operate. But I don't think I'll ever
be able to convince the world
>> No. even yourself [laughter] that it
isn't some Baby Reindeer reference. So I
think I'm going to I'm going to have to
live with
>> something floating around in your mind.
[laughter]
But tell me about a little bit more
about inhabiting Reuben because
even just your physical transformation
for him
is quite striking. I think you gained I
don't know how much 50 lb of muscle or
something like that to to play him. But
how did you get into that body and and
into that mindset? I knew it was like a
huge undertaking because I think like
I knew that in order to explore
what what people consider a sort of
alpha male
character, I needed to be big in my body
like I did. I needed to be big. You
know, I worked out 6 days a week. I had
them nutritionist. I had the meals made
for me and sent to me and I had to eat
them at certain times.
And I didn't [snorts] stray from my diet
once apart from on on days where I do
topless scenes where, you know, you
would you would go through a process of
sort of dehydration almost like a like a
>> the muscles more defined, right?
>> the muscles more defined. And it's a it
is incredible how it works. You know, I
would be looking at myself in the mirror
the day before thinking I'm just not
there. I'm just not there. And then you
go through a very intense, and I can't
believe how intense it is, period period
of sweating your your yourself down to
to make the muscles more defined as you
say. Uh and it's kind of incredible. Do
Do you feel uh like you're someone who
who has to be uh sort of conscientious
or intentional about his relationship
with his own body?
Yeah, I think I think I think I I think
I do. I think I'm always
down on it. And I think I sometimes even
look at sort of Reuben sometimes feel
like
I wish [snorts] I could have pushed a
bit more. I wish I could have maybe been
a bit bigger. And and I think I think a
lot of gym-goers, certainly gym-goers I
know speak to a a certain sense. I don't
want to use this word like but sort of a
body like insecurity and not being able
to just kind of see the reality. It's
like I know so many guys
>> It's almost like dysmorphia almost.
>> Dysmorphia, exactly. That was the
the word I was reaching for. And I think
I think like and I think I certainly you
have it. I certainly would have it with
my my personal trainer. I'd be like,
"Listen, I need to get bigger. What are
we going to do? What are we going to
do?" And he'd be like, "You're fine.
You're good. You're big. You're big."
But you don't notice because when you're
like I didn't notice because it was
incremental changes cuz you look at
yourself in the mirror every day. You
don't notice you're changing. It's other
people that notice you're changing. And
I think it's so innately human to to
have sort of
body issues or body insecurities, for
sure. And so
now I want to ask a little bit about
something that you
alluded to earlier, but um
like there there was obviously a huge
shift for you in so many ways as a
result of Baby Reindeer. Mhm. And and
so, you know, I think for
many artists, particularly artists who
have been working for a long time, you
know, kind kind of
>> [clears throat and snorts]
>> on the margins a little bit. There there
might be a sense of
you know, sort of shooting towards
having a larger success and then sort of
that
recognition or sort of validation might
fill some sort of hole that was there
before. You know, it's like if when when
I get successful, I will feel different
or
that that kind of thing. Did Did you
have any of those sorts of
realizations or feelings? Yeah, you
know, it's funny like I I think Baby
Reindeer explored this in a lot of ways,
you know, I remember Donny Dunn's
monologue at the end of the show, which
is always that kind of the famous bit in
Baby Reindeer where he kind of goes um
fame, they they see you as famous. They
don't think of all these other things
that I'm scared they're thinking, like
this guy's this and this guy's that.
Now having lived that out, I don't I'm
not sure that's quite the reality. I
think in a lot of ways I I always think
the bad things start times times a
million now cuz there's more people
looking at me. So it's funny. I mean,
I'm I'm jesting to a certain degree, but
I
I think there is that that idea that a
lot of artists I think
I think a lot of artists chase success
cuz I think they think it answers a sort
of internal problem. But I I do
>> that's what I'm getting at, yeah.
Yeah, absolutely. And I I I do think
with me
it didn't provide me
answers really. It led to kind of things
in my life that I liked and it led to to
things in my life that I appreciate like
I said before, like opportunities, which
is always just all I really want anyway.
But in terms of answering sort of deep
soul-driven questions,
I don't think it did that in any way,
shape or form. And I I would caution
against anyone really chasing fame for
that very reason. I think chasing
success can be great for motivating you
and pulling you out of
the trenches of of deep discomfort and
all these kinds of things. But but I
think chasing fame, the idea of idolatry
and being loved
will never answer the question of
whether you love yourself. It really
does come from within and I I'm not
saying I do love myself. I love myself a
lot more than I did 10 years ago, but I
still have a long way to go. And it's
funny, I I I always thought of myself as
a fairly sort of cultured person, you
know, but but I always remember the
ending of RuPaul's Drag Race where he go
how the hell like if you can't love
yourself, how the hell you going to love
someone else? Can I get an amen? I'm
like, [laughter] oh, Ru, you're killing
me right now.
And
and and for a reason, I would always
watch that and I'd always like sit
uncomfortably in my chair because it's
so true, you know.
It's just so true. Yeah, that's very
interesting. Um
I wonder if it connects to what you said
earlier about
always feeling sort of a hole in the
soul. And it it's interesting cuz I
listened to the interview that you did
with Marc Maron probably 2 years ago,
something like that. And you used that
exact same phrase, hole hole in the soul
as something that you you felt. And I I
wondered if you had any clarity about
where that hole came from. I I think
I think I mean, the big turning point in
my life was being sexually abused,
groomed, all that kind of stuff. I mean,
that that was no doubt where
things started to
um [snorts]
you know, like where where I felt like
my whole physiology, psychology, sense
of self changed dramatically overnight
and I felt sort of completely
disconnected to to to to to to the
world, you know.
Um
you know, Jesus, I just remember like
I remember I was just in London, you
know, like I I I I was working at a pub
and
I I sort of was so skint that like I
could only ever really afford the bus
cuz the tube was too expensive. So I
just walk everywhere and I just walk
everywhere and I lived so far away from
Camden where the pub was and I I I sort
of just um
I just remember just feeling so
disconnected from life, just wandering
around these streets where no one ever
even looks at you. And
And so I think like a large part of my
sort of existential crisis sort of
happened there. But if I look back at my
life, I I I do think that there was
always a an insecurity and a kind of
listlessness or a sort of like a
wondering of some kind, you know, like I
even think of like at the time when I
went to university, you know, when I I
left home to go to
Glasgow and I just remember this kind of
cloak of self-consciousness kind of
coming over over me and I and I just
felt so lost and insecure and like I
didn't I didn't know who to be or what
to do and I probably tried to be several
different people before I tried to be
myself and
and I just remember that also being odd.
Like when I was out in the world and I
had to fend for myself, I I didn't
really know
that I even had a self to fend for. It
was it was a very strange feeling. So I
think that hole in the soul has always
been there and I I guess like in the end
I always turn to art. I think a lot of
the reason people create art is to find
some sort of meaning in life where where
where they felt none in a lot of ways.
They they
search for answers in a lot of ways.
Um
yeah,
and and
I guess that's the journey I'm on as
well. What was the experience like of
you know, not only
becoming a sort of a
publicly recognizable figure, but
becoming a recognizable figure for a
piece of work that was so much about a
trauma that you suffered. You know, it's
it's like you know, it's
one person's
bingeable show was the worst event of
your life.
Yeah.
>> That's a strange seems to me like a
strange state to
sort of
inhabit or like two strange experiences
to be the bridge between in a way. Did
you feel any strangeness around that?
>> Yeah, it was very sort of
it was very destabilizing and and very
sort of interesting. I never want to act
like I didn't think Baby Reindeer was
going to be a success. I I really did
think it was going to be a success. Like
I really did think that.
But did [clears throat] I think it would
be a sort of mainstream sensation at one
point in the kind of top 10 Netflix sort
of most watched
English-speaking shows of all time? I I
didn't
I didn't think for a second it was going
to do that.
And then that of course brings with it a
kind of multitude of
opinions and comments on your Instagram
page, which can be quite like God, they
have a they have a lot to say. And some
of those opinions can be quite harsh and
they can be quite hard to read and all
these kinds of things. But
it's kind of what you sign up for. Like
I I I I I sort of almost like I've read
a lot of like difficult things, but I've
I kind of like kind of got used to it in
a way. It's hard to describe. I think I
found the whole process on the whole
quite healing actually more than
anything else. But there was difficult
moments and and it was difficult putting
my life for people to dissect and and
and have opinions over.
>> I'm I'm maybe trying to get at something
just slightly different. It's not so
much about you know, critical reaction
or or people having opinions about the
work. But let me let me try and in
and I don't I promise I don't mean this
in any sort of
self-aggrandizing way or trying to make
any sort of parallel between you know,
your experience and mine. But maybe this
is this can help be illustrative of of
what I'm getting at. You know, in in
December I did an interview with the
actress Kristen Stewart. You know, and
we were we were talking about things
that maybe we don't want to know about
ourselves. And you know, one thing she
asked she put the question back to me
and I I said, you know, one thing
I just mentioned that I can have some
some discomfort in my own body or
disdain for
my physical appearance. [clears throat]
And then you know, I think
people after that interview came out
would say like, oh, I really liked that
that interview or you know, that was a
good interview. And always in
in my head I would think like, oh, now
this person knows like a deep insecurity
I have because I I said it in public,
you know. And it seems to me that you
have have had an extreme version of that
where the people who see you at the bar
know
sort of the darkest thing that has
happened to you. And does does
did you find that that had any effect
either just on on yourself or how you
related to to other people or strangers?
I absolutely relate to what you're
saying and I totally get what you mean
now. Yeah, I I feel like since Baby
Reindeer it's it's been almost akin to
sort of almost feeling like I've been
walking around naked to a certain
degree. And but but I I realize like
every time I I do feel that
self-consciousness, I think back to
like, you know,
really
what I shared in Baby Reindeer wasn't
something to be ashamed of. And every
time I feel like a sense of shame, if we
talk about the abuse stuff, I sort of my
mind can sometimes go there. Are they
are they thinking about that? Are they
thinking about that?
I realize and I think back to the young
>> [snorts]
>> boy I was when all that kind of stuff
happened and I I I think uh
that that that's just like a the feeling
of shame that I had at the time, you
know? And that really it's not worth
paying too much attention to when it
comes. But I think the problem with the
the human
brain is it can sort of
the feeling can hit you before your
ability to rationalize it. And I think
that is such like the human if you have
feelings of shame or feelings of fear or
feelings of guilt or feelings of all
these things, they hit you before you're
like, oh, why do I feel that way? And
then your brain helps you understand it.
And I think that's the kind of process
with Baby Reindeer. Sometimes someone
comes up in public, they say something.
You know, but then
your brain rationalizes it. You know,
Baby Reindeer like I'm I'm I'm still not
ashamed of putting that out there in the
world on the grand scheme of things, you
know? My brain can sometimes be insecure
in public, bunch of people looking over
what they're thinking, what they're
saying, what jokes are they making? One
of the worst things I think is when you
see a group at a table pointing over and
laughing. You're like, oh,
who made what joke, you know? But they
might not be making a joke. They might
they might not have anything to do with
you. But that that's your brain creating
reasons to
to be sort of self-destructive in a way.
But but but I I I I I think on the grand
scheme of things, you know, the the the
positive things I get, the messages, the
letters, these heartbreaking kind of
letters and heartbreaking responses,
if I have to feel like a little bit more
self-conscious in public so that people
feel a little more peace in their lives
in grand scheme of things, then I think
it's kind of a a kind of feeling worth
putting up with almost in a way.
>> [gasps]
>> And I think like on the whole
it was in a lot of ways it was one of
the best things I did putting all that
stuff out there warts and all, for for
the entire world to see because
I've got kind of nothing to hide anymore
and and that that can feel quite
freeing. You know, it's that old Janis
Joplin song, isn't it?
What is freedom just another word?
Yeah. Yeah, freedom is just another word
for nothing left to lose.
>> Yeah. And it's kind of um
it's kind of a it's kind of a
a amazing that I've put it all out there
now and
uh
I've sort of expressed my
vulnerabilities, so I in a way I also
feel like people
can't hurt me so much anymore. I do
think that on the whole
it led to to positive growth in me and
and hopefully in in people who watched
it and could could relate to it.
You know, I I just want to say that in
in preparation for speaking with you, I
went back and read, you know, 10 years
worth of of interviews with with Richard
Gadd and and you're
in so many of them you're you're so open
and and soul-bearing and and honest
about, you know, your anxieties and and
sort of your your darker times and and
uh
I I I found my
>> [laughter]
>> I found myself really feeling almost
protective of you, you know? I think
this is a guy who who kind of
um
has some some raw nerves there that that
he's he's willing to expose. And so
it just makes me
want to know and
and you know, you know, answer this
question however honestly you you want
to answer it, but
how do you feel about yourself these
days?
God, yeah.
You're good.
>> [laughter]
>> I don't know.
I don't know. I think better than I did,
you know? I think better than I used to,
for sure. Um I think I'm more like
settled in myself and I I I think like I
feel like um
I'm starting to kind of accept and and
and go at a pace which I used to just
think I was just in a constant
constant battle with myself. And that
was because I couldn't accept certain
parts of myself or I I I'd been through
things I couldn't forget or I was just
so self-damning like the way I would
speak to myself was just like appalling,
like appalling ways I speak to myself.
But I think I've I've gone on a journey
recently of like self-discovery. I I I
think I I spent a lot of time by myself,
you know? I've been I've been single for
a very long time now and I've spent a
lot of time with myself. I never used to
be by myself and it's actually a a good
quality. I recommend any person should
spend an elongated period of time by
themselves in their life because you
really learn how to be with yourself and
I never could do that. I used to almost
like not be able to even just spend one
millisecond just looking inwards.
And so even just that
is an improvement, but there's still a
long way to go. I sometimes I think like
half the battle in life is thinking that
there is some sort of switch where it
all is okay or that that that you can
reach a point in your life where you
have an almost
serene consciousness. You can almost
have a a sort of a click moment in life
where you are at peace with yourself and
at peace with everyone. You can wander
in a room and you won't care what people
think and you can have an interaction.
You won't care if you've come across
badly or well or you can forget about
things in your past or you can move
forward with positivity and optimism,
but you know, life is challenging and
life is hard and and and I think a lot
of a lot of it is accepting that
the the struggle will always mutate into
different sort of struggles and that
it's how you manage those choppy waters.
That's what what kind of makes a person
um
be well in themselves. Thank you so much
for for taking all the time to speak
with me today and um I'm very much
looking forward to connecting with you
again. I think it's next week.
>> Yes. Hopefully I'll be in a more
professional-looking setting.
No, it looks great. It looks great. And
yeah, thanks very much. I really enjoyed
that chat. So I really appreciate that.
Thank you.
>> [music]
>> On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So a few days after my first
conversation with Richard, I wanted to
hear more about his thoughts on personal
trauma, how it's understood or
misunderstood in our society, [music]
and what role it plays in his work.
You know, the last time I was
self-conscious about my background, but
I I just want to say it, you know, I
don't know exactly where you are, but
I'm sorry you've been incarcerated. Yes,
yeah, no, absolutely. Um I have been
incarcerated. This is an edit suite. So
so I've been incarcerated here for about
a year working on Half Man. And yeah,
it's actually this is probably one of
the more glamorous rooms. There's
actually some with like quite quite raw
piping. They would almost looks like
it's passing through my ears. So we
picked actually one of the more
glamorous backdrops.
>> [laughter]
>> But yeah, I don't see daylight very
often. So I I want to just zoom out for
a second. So so both Half Man and Baby
Reindeer deal in various ways with the
subject of trauma. And you know, there's
this idea that
there's
this kind of almost like a template that
we call the the trauma plot, you know,
where it's like a character has been
traumatized and that trauma in their
backstory sort of explains everything
about their actions and then it usually
at the end there's some sort of
cathartic moment. Um And that just is a
very standard storytelling framework
now. And at the same time
I think
in the broader culture more individuals
sort of identify as uh
having experienced trauma or has been
traumatized people. Like I I have a
friend who literally said to me she
thinks every person is traumatized. And
without giving anything away, I'm like I
just think what you're describing is
life. Like I don't I [laughter] don't
think that's trauma, you know?
But who who am I to judge anyone else's
trauma? But I'm just sort of curious
what you think about the the subject and
how trauma is now sort of understood
so much more
widely.
Yeah, I'll stop there. No, I I hear you
know, it's funny when when when you said
what your friend had said, I I sort of
went oh, that's interesting. I I I
agree. Yeah, I I sort of I sort of I
which I find quite interesting. I I
think everyone has a battle of some kind
going on with themselves. If I think
about even the most well-functioning
people in my life, there's still things
that I observe about them and I'm like
that comes from somewhere and that comes
from something. And
I think we all have blind spots as
people and I think we all have positives
and negative traits and all kinds of
things. And I think we're shaped by our
experiences and way more of the kind of
belief that we we are formed by
um things that have happened to us. I I
think about the shift I went through in
my life, the the really horrific stuff
that's happened to me in my life. And I
think almost like a brain chemistry of
of before and after. I almost feel like
before that I had a clear pattern of
thinking. Like I
I used to think a little little more
singularly, whereas after I always felt
like my thoughts were discombobulating
and self-scarring
and inwards. And I I guess I became
introverted is probably the more simple
way of putting it. And I think that is
an impact of trauma. And I think
everyone has, whether small or big,
things in life has gone through
difficulty which has preoccupied their
brain in a way which I would say is
trauma. That's how I I guess I see
things. And you correct me if I'm wrong,
but this is just on the idea of the
impacts of trauma, but I think I read
somewhere in an interview that you
actually hadn't
had same-sex attraction until after your
assault. Is that right? Yeah, that that
is that is true. And I I I know that
that's a kind of like a controversial
idea, but that that's
I I've never said it's because of that.
That's that's absolutely where I I so
I'd never say that. I say that perhaps
it forced me to look at myself in a way
where I had to re-examine myself. Maybe
I was starting for me to be
repressing myself in such a way that I
never looked before.
I'm not sure what it is. All I know is
that I went through a period, I mean
this is radically honest, of almost the
feeling quite
asexual and then
getting
um
very confused, I suppose, and then
exploring that and realizing that I'm
sort of fine both ways. And even now I'm
still sort of a little bit lost with
with it all. I I I'm not I I do think
that it that that that abuse of that
nature can leave you kind of very sort
of in your body uncertain. But I'm not
saying that it abuse makes you
gay in any way. But but I I certainly
but my truth, which nobody can take from
me, is that I didn't question myself
until something like that had happened,
you know? It just seems like a a hard
one to wrap the head around. Yeah,
absolutely. And and that's that's why
like I always like my my shows to be
sort of
inconsistent in a way. At least the
characters like inconsistent. Like
people doing and saying things that
aren't necessarily clear. Like like we
it's so easy
you see coming out things on television,
don't you? And it's like all the
character needs to do is say I'm gay and
everything's fine. Whereas in reality,
like I think that that there is a slight
mythology. That can really work for
people. I know but I know people as well
in their life who've said that thinking
that
the smoke would clear. And actually it's
not about saying it or people knowing.
It's about saying it to yourself and you
knowing. And that that I think is is is
a
a sort of a fascinating part of
self-acceptance. People are all whole
all sorts of everything and I I think
that's important. I think that's
fascinating and I think
I just think that's like being human,
you know? Yeah. You know, you know,
something that um
stuck out for me and I wondered if it
was telling in a way is that earlier
when I had just asked you you know, how
are you doing?
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. you kind of
offhanded and you and you didn't really
pursue it. You you said you're single
now, and you know, you've been single
for a while, and I I just wondered if
just if relationships are hard for you
typically.
Mhm.
Uh Like, why did that pop Why did that
pop out when I when I asked? Because I
think I think before in my life, I
always relationship hopped, I think. And
particularly in the the sort of
aftermath of everything that happened,
you know, um
I I suddenly think like I I I thought
that that I needed someone there to
comfort. And I think I I I
I I I sort of realized when I sort of
got myself sober and and made that big
change in my life that I realized that
I needed to have a period of time by
myself. Because I'm quite proud of
myself for being single for for that
long. I I know that feels like like
quite a a man thing to say, but I think
in my life, I always kind of
I I relationship hopped to some degree,
you know, and I I think I I always felt
like I couldn't be alone, and it's what
I suppose is this kind of like running
from self, running from being able to
sit with myself. And I suppose I I think
I I I perhaps used to do that. Not that
I didn't love and adore all the people
that I met along the way, and and I've
fallen in and out of love a good few
times in my life, and and uh but I think
I made a decision in my life for once
these to be single, and I think I
learned really through through
extraordinary self-discipline to kind of
stand on my own two feet. And now I
sometimes worry that I'm too comfortable
being single, and I don't really want to
be anywhere. Uh which isn't necessarily
true, but I I sometimes feel like oh
yeah, I probably should maybe get back
in the dating scene. And but but I think
that is actually testament to how far
I've come in a way.
>> And so, just to to
connect things to your work a little
bit,
given how much your work is about
sort of processing things and and
exploring ideas and and feelings that
you've experienced, which tend to be
related to sort of darker things, do you
do you think of art as something that
for you could be a way to,
you know, express uh
joy or or optimism or like, could you
imagine doing sort of a
And I I don't mean this in like a a
perfunctory way, but doing like a a
lighthearted
piece of work?
I have been thinking about doing a
lighthearted piece of, but I I suppose I
think like even if I was to
this this so I always have this theory,
and whether it's true or not, is that
your your kind of art chooses you in a
way. Like like like Like I think that a
lot of people when they start they they
go uh you know, like
like, for example, I start down comedy,
or I love the comedy stylings of this
person, therefore I must be like this
person. I always think comedians go on a
journey where they almost start by via
imitation, at least in terms of style,
and it tips them back to their voice
kind of chooses them, and their voice
steers them. And then a comedian really
really um becomes exemplary when they
really realize what they have to say.
And that journey is so hard as an
artist. And I think because my
understanding of life is contradiction
and to a certain degree sort of
internalized pain. Not that that's so
uh goth, but uh but but I but I I I sort
of
>> [snorts]
>> I I feel like that even if I did do a
comedy, that the characters would still
have to have some sort of comedic link
to some sort of like pain of some kind.
But but the idea excites me, I and um
you know,
never say never, I suppose. Is there
work that you turn to personally for
like sort of pure pleasure or pure joy
or just just because you think it's
funny?
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, yeah, I mean,
Laurel and Hardy films I still watch.
Yeah, yeah. I absolutely love them. I I
don't know what it is about them. They
almost make me sort of cry. It's weird.
I I sort of I don't know what it is. I
think I watched them when I was a kid
like religiously, and I don't know
whether like my programming of life was
is all sort of built into me when I was
a young age. My mom would sit at the
bottom of the stairs, and she would
listen to me laughing at the music box,
and she would end up and she said to me
one of the best times she ever had as a
parent was just sitting listening to me
laughing at the film.
And I I don't know when I watch it now,
I I sort of I tend to watch stuff so
different to what I do, you know? Like,
I watch wrestling a lot, and I watch
football a lot. I'd never really watch
if something I I know is going to carry
quite a heaviness, I actually don't
really really watch it.
>> [laughter]
>> It's strange.
And can I ask you to This is something
that I think about for in my own terms
sometimes also, but
on the idea of or like working through
your experiences and working through it
in your art,
is there ever any
sense of like,
I'd actually like to transcend this
and have worked through it and be on the
other side and onto other things?
Or or is it just more like, no, this
this is who I am, and this is what I do,
and it's not about getting through it in
some way?
Gosh, yeah.
Uh It's a good question. I I suppose I
would say that one would hope that I
would get to that point. How close I am
to that is quite far, of course. I
suppose
my place in life or my understanding of
life is still full of contradiction and
sort of
internalization to a certain degree. I I
suppose I would hope that one day
I don't know, maybe I I do something
that's so far removed from me that it it
feels like some sort of release, like
it's not even a part of me, or it's not
it's not precious or precious to it. So,
I think I think if I was to move away,
it would have to I would have to find
some sort of divine
some peace and spirituality within
myself, which feels quite far at the
moment. But but I'm I am everything's
getting better, so so we'll see.
Richard, thank you so much for taking
the time to speak with me, and Thank
you.
>> I I really like your work a lot, and I
wish you all the best with it. Thank you
very much. Thank you. It's been lovely
chatting. Thanks for the great questions
and everything like that. Really
appreciate that.
>> [music]
>> I'm Lulu Garcia-Navarro. And I'm David
Marchese. And we're the hosts of The
Interview, an audio and video podcast
from The New York Times.
>> Every week, we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life. Subscribe to our YouTube channel,
so [music] you'll never miss an episode.